
# Merging Paired-End Sequence Reads

## 0. Introduction and Preparation

Merging paired-end reads is a critical step in many genomic sequencing workflows. This process can enhance the quality and accuracy of subsequent assemblies by combining reads that overlap into single reads.

**Required software and tools for merging process:**

- [BBMerge 39.06](https://jgi.doe.gov/data-and-tools/software-tools/bbtools/bb-tools-user-guide/bbmerge-guide/): A tool for merging overlapping paired-end reads.

- [OpenJDK 21.0.2](https://jdk.java.net/21/): Java development kit required to run BBMerge.

## 1. Input

The input files are paired-end sequence reads, typically named following the pattern `DNA1_R1.fastq.gz` and `DNA1_R2.fastq.gz`. These files are stored 

in separate directories for each pair of reads.

Define the directories where R1 and R2 reads are located:

```bash
READS_DIR_R1='reads/R1'
READS_DIR_R2='reads/R2'
```

## 2. Output

Outputs of the merging process include merged reads, unmerged reads, and a histogram of insert sizes. Here are the directories for each type of output:

```bash
OUTPUT_DIR='/output'
MERGED_DIR="$OUTPUT_DIR/merged"
UNMERGED_DIR="$OUTPUT_DIR/unmerged"
IHIST_DIR="$OUTPUT_DIR/ihist"
```

## 3. Choice 1: Merge Overlapping Paired Reads

This option merges reads that directly overlap. The script identifies pairs by their basename, then uses BBMerge to combine them.

**bbmerge.sh** is one shell script for BBMerge, which can merge two overlapping paired reads into a single read. 

**in1** one read of the paired-end read

**in2** another read in the same pair

**out** "outmerged", merged reads go to "out" folder

**outu** "outunmerged", unmerged reads go to "outu" folder

**ihist** represents the insert size histogram generated after finishing the process

### Script to Merge Overlapping Reads

```bash
for R1 in $READS_DIR/*_R1.fastq.gz; do
    BASENAME=$(basename $R1 _R1.fastq.gz)
    R2="$READS_DIR_R2/${BASENAME}_R2.fastq.gz"
    if [ ! -f "$R2" ]; then
        continue
    fi
OUT_MERGED="$MERGED_DIR/${BASENAME}_merged.fq.gz"
OUT_UNMERGED="$UNMERGED_DIR/${BASENAME}_unmerged.fq.gz"
OUT_IHIST="$IHIST_DIR/${BASENAME}_ihist.txt"
bbmerge.sh in1=$R1 in2=$R2 out=$OUT_MERGED outu=$OUT_UNMERGED ihist=$OUT_IHIST
done
```

## 4 Choice 2: Merge Also Nonoverlapping Paired Reads

For reads that do not overlap, this option uses the `bbmerge-auto.sh` script from BBMerge to artificially extend reads and attempt to create overlaps.

**bbmerge-auto.sh** is another shell script for BBMerge, which can also merge the nonoverlapping reads using kmers-iterations. 

**extend2=20 iterations=5** extends each read 20 bp, and up to 5 iterations.

### Script to Merge Nonoverlapping Reads

```bash
for R1 in $READS_DIR/*_R1.fastq.gz; do
    BASENAME=$(basename $R1 _R1.fastq.gz)
    R2="$READS_DIR_R2/${BASENAME}_R2.fastq.gz"
    if [ ! -f "$R2" ]; then
        continue
    fi
OUT_MERGED="$MERGED_DIR/${BASENAME}_merged.fq.gz"
OUT_UNMERGED="$UNMERGED_DIR/${BASENAME}_unmerged.fq.gz"
OUT_IHIST="$IHIST_DIR/${BASENAME}_ihist.txt"
bbmerge-auto.sh in1=$R1 in2=$R2 out=$OUT_MERGED outu=$OUT_UNMERGED ihist=$OUT_IHIST ecct extend2=20 iterations=5
done
```

Each option in the documentation provides a specific approach to merging paired-end reads, ensuring users can choose the method that best fits their data and desired outcomes.