
# Annotating Genes for Contigs of Assemblies

## 0. Introduction and Preparation

Genome annotation is crucial in identifying and labeling genomic DNA sequences with useful information. This process allows for a better understanding of genetic functions and regulatory mechanisms.

**Required software and tools:**

- [Prokka 1.14.6](https://github.com/tseemann/prokka): Prokka is a rapid software tool used to annotate bacterial, archaeal, and viral genomes. It produces standards-compliant annotated files.

## 1. Input

The input for the annotation process consists of assembled genomic sequences typically output by assemblers like Unicycler, such as `assembly.fasta`.

## 2. Output

The annotation process generates several types of files, including:

- **.gbf** (Genbank files): Standard file format for genomes, providing rich detail about gene sequences, features, and annotations.

- **.faa** (Protein FASTA files): Contains translated CDS sequences which are useful for comparisons with other assemblies.


## 3. Choice 1: Annotating for Contigs of Assemblies Running Prokka in Default Mode

This section describes the use of Prokka in its default mode to annotate genome assemblies. The output directory and the naming conventions for the files are specified.

### Running the Annotation

**--outdir** is output directory

**--prefix** is the prefix of the files' name inside output folder, usually we define it as the sample name

**"$assembly_file"** is the assemblies need to be annotated

```bash
BASE_DIR="/assembled_folder"
ANNOTATION_BASE_DIR="/annotation/output"
mkdir -p "$ANNOTATION_BASE_DIR"
for dir in "$BASE_DIR"/*/; do
    assembly_file="${dir}assembly.fasta"
        if [[ -f "$assembly_file" ]]; then
        sample_name=$(basename "$dir")
                outdir="$ANNOTATION_BASE_DIR/${sample_name}_annotation"
        mkdir -p "$outdir"
                echo "Running Prokka for $sample_name"
        prokka --outdir "$outdir" --prefix "$sample_name" "$assembly_file"
    else
    fi
done
```

## 4. Choice 2: Annotating for Contigs of Assemblies Running Prokka in Reference Genome Priority Mode

In this choice, Prokka is run with a preference for a reference genome to guide the annotation process, ensuring annotations are consistent and informed by known genetic information.

### Running the Annotation with Reference Genome

**--outdir** is output directory

**--prefix** is the prefix of the files' name inside output folder, usually we define it as the sample name

**"$assembly_file"** is the assemblies we annotated

**--force** means force overwriting existing output folder 

**--proteins** means fasta file of trusted proteins to first annotate from (reference genome)

```bash
BASE_DIR="/assembled_folder"
ANNOTATION_BASE_DIR="/annotation/output"
mkdir -p "$ANNOTATION_BASE_DIR"
for dir in "$BASE_DIR"/*/; do
    assembly_file="${dir}assembly.fasta"
        if [[ -f "$assembly_file" ]]; then
        sample_name=$(basename "$dir")
                outdir="$ANNOTATION_BASE_DIR/${sample_name}_annotation"
        mkdir -p "$outdir"
        prokka --force --proteins "/reference_genome/ecoli_k12.gbff" --outdir "$outdir" --prefix "$sample_name" "$assembly_file"
    else
    fi
done
```

## 5. Choice 3: Annotating for Contigs of Assemblies Running Prokka using created database

In this choice, Prokka is run with a created database to guide the annotation process, ensuring that the annotation is more comprehensive and informed by all known genetic information.

### Creating a database

#### Downloading all E. coli complete genomes from NCBI, then unzip all `.gbff` files

```bash
find genome_folder -type f -name "*.gz" -exec gunzip {} +
```

#### Combine All GenBank Files into One FASTA File

```bash
for file in *.gbk; do
    prokka-genbank_to_fasta_db "$file" >> E.coli.faa
done
```

#### Run CD-HIT to Reduce Redundancy

**-i** input_proteins.faa: Input FASTA file.

**-o** output_proteins.faa: Output file for clustered sequences.

**-c** 0.90: Sequence identity threshold; 90% in this example. Sequences in the same cluster have this level of identity or higher.

**-n 5**: Word size. For protein sequences, 5 is typical for identity thresholds 0.7 and up.

**-T 4**: Number of threads. Adjust this based on your CPU capabilities for faster processing.

**-M 2000**: Maximum available memory in MB. Adjust based on your system's resources.

```bash
cd-hit -i input_proteins.faa -o output_proteins.faa -c 0.90 -n 5 -T 4 -M 2000
```

### Running Prokka

```bash
prokka -protein output_proteins.faa --outdir output_folder --prefix sample_name assembly_file
```

In each choice, the script iterates over directories containing assembly files, checking for their existence and running Prokka accordingly. The process is automated to handle multiple samples efficiently, ensuring each is annotated in a dedicated output directory.


